Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty introduces the player to Raiden in the Plant chapter; Jack is introduced as a newly recruited, virtual reality-trained member of FOXHOUND with no live-combat experience before his current mission. He is assisted via Codec by his commanding officer the Colonel and his girlfriend Rosemary. Raiden's initial objective is to rescue several hostages from a terrorist group known as the Sons of Liberty. During his mission, Raiden is helped by mercenary Solid Snake and spy Olga Gurlukovich.
As the story progresses, Jack is revealed to be a former child soldier who fought for the Sons of Liberty leader Solidus Snake during the First Liberian Civil War. After the war's end, Raiden was given a normal life and tried to forget his past. It is revealed that a clandestine organization known as The Patriots is controlling his actions and his commanding officer is revealed as their computer-generated Artificial intelligence (AI). One of their spies becomes Raiden's girlfriend and the two fall in love. Raiden defeats Solidus after the Patriots' AIs tell him his death would also trigger those of Olga's child and Rosemary, the latter of whom is revealed to have been pregnant with Raiden's child during the mission. He later reunites with Rosemary, and both decide to stay together to raise their unborn child.
Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots (set five years after Metal Gear Solid 2) features Raiden after rescuing Olga's daughter Sunny from the Patriots, and searching the corpse of the mercenary Big Boss for Big Mama in exchange. The trauma of his breakup with Rosemary and the apparent miscarriage of his child have made Raiden believe he belongs on the battlefield. Raiden is fitted with a cybernetic exoskeleton as a result of the Patriots' machinations; he helps Solid Snake in the fight against Liquid Ocelot, wanting to obtain the Patriots' powers. However, he is wounded by Vamp in a fight. With his blood having been replaced with a military substitute called "White Blood" (白血, Shiro Chi) that requires regular maintenance, Raiden is treated by Sunny and Doctor Naomi Hunter. Following his recovery, Raiden goes back to Snake, killing Vamp and stays in Ocelot's ship Outer Haven to protect Snake as he shuts down the Patriots' AIs. In an epilogue, Rosemary tells Raiden their child was not miscarried; her marriage to Roy Campbell was a hoax to protect her and their son from the Patriots. Upon hearing this news, Raiden reconciles with Rosemary.
Raiden returns as the main character in Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance, which is set four years after Metal Gear Solid 4. He is a member of the private military company (PMC) Maverick Security in multiple tasks while raising money for his family. They are attacked by a group of terrorists called Desperado Enforcement LLC that kill his protectee, N'mani, and leave Raiden near to death with mercenary Jetstream Sam taking a liking to his fighting style. He is saved by the elder scientist Wilhelm "Doktor" Voight and starts working with them to fight Desperado. Raiden fights Desperado's LQ-84i, an AI placed in a robot who works for Desperado but Raiden takes pity on it and has Doktor restore it under the name of Blade Wolf who assists him. Raiden's vengeful obsession with Desperado becomes personal when he discovers during a mission to Mexico that Desperado and World Marshal Inc have kidnapped several children, surgically removed their brains to place into cybernetic bodies, and were planning to subject them to VR training modeled on his own. Raiden then resigns from Maverick to pursue and retrieve the children's brain cases from World Marshal in Colorado, embracing his sadistic persona "Jack the Ripper" due to his constant struggles with Sam and Desperado's cyborg Monsoon. Raiden defeats Desperado and learns that Steven Armstrong was using PMCs to distract him as he attempts to create a new War on Terror. When Blade Wolf passes Raiden's sword of the late Sam, Raiden stops Armstrong's actions and decides not to return to Maverick and travels to the Middle East to battle World Marshal mercenaries.
Raiden does not appear in Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater but he is parodied throughout the game by debuting character Raikov. Raiden appears in a series of comical scenes in an early promotional trailer for Guns of the Patriots, in which he fights for control of the franchise with Solid Snake. A sequel to the trailer titled "Metal Gear Raiden: Snake Eraser" was produced; Raiden travels to the past to assassinate Big Boss but fails comically. In the trailer's English version, Raiden is voiced by Charlie Schlatter (the voice actor for Raikov) rather than Quinton Flynn. Raiden's Metal Gear Solid 2 version appears in the Metal Gear Solid: Portable Ops Plus expansion pack as an unlockable character. His Metal Gear Solid 4 incarnation appears as a playable character in Metal Gear Online.
In Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes, Raiden stars in a non-canonical mission titled "Jamais Vu". Having time-traveled to the past, he infiltrates Camp Omega under orders from MSF. His aim is to incapacitate a group of soldiers known as the "body snatchers", a reference to the android replicators in Kojima's video game Snatcher. His appearance in this game is modeled on that in Metal Gear Rising.
The Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty 2007 comic book adaptation by Alex Garner retells Raiden's story with few changes. His relationship with Solidus is explored when he remembers his past; when Solidus is about to kill him, Raiden is saved by Snake. The game's novelization by Raymond Benson makes minor modifications to Raiden's history, except for the moment he receives Olga's sword, resulting in a change to his battle psyche. When Raiden kills Solidus he cuts the rope on Federal Hall National Memorial's flagpole, causing an American flag to cover his enemy's body. This scene was deleted from the original game due to the September 11 attacks.
Outside the Metal Gear series, Raiden appears in the video game LittleBigPlanet as a sticker and a playable sack-boy character in the Metal Gear Solid 4 downloadable content. He is an unlockable character in Evolution Skateboarding. He also appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a collectible sticker and in Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood as an alternative skin for Ezio Auditore da Firenze. Raiden is playable in the video games PlayStation All-Stars Battle Royale and Super Bomberman R using his Metal Gear Rising design. The webseries Mega64 includes a parody of Raiden's story in Revengeance; the character struggles against his darker persona while making breakfast.
