According to series creator Hideo Kojima, the decision to make a new character to replace Solid Snake for most of Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty stemmed from the developer's desire to develop Snake from a third-person perspective. Kojima stated that Raiden's character and his perception by the audience were important to the overall feel of the story. The idea of having a second main character was inspired by the Sherlock Holmes short stories and novels in which the narrator is Dr. Watson rather than Holmes. Kojima said Snake was the game's protagonist rather than Raiden. Yoshikazu Matsuhana, assistant director for the project, was uncertain about this decision; he considered Raiden a "weak-looking character" but decided to follow Kojima. The codename "Raiden" was based on that of the Mitsubishi J2M Raiden, a historical combat aircraft of the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service. It was initially planned to be written in katakana as "ライデン", but was changed to the kanji form "雷電" because of a resemblance to Bin Laden's "Laden" in katakana, "ラーディン". His full name was going to be "Raiden Brannigan" but the idea was scrapped. The romantic relationship between Raiden and Rosemary was inspired by Kojima's experiences; their names, Jack and Rose, are a reference to Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet's lead characters in the film Titanic. In Metal Gear Solid 2, Raiden is considered to be a representation of the player through the experiences between the player and the character during the game.
Kojima received much fan mail; one letter from a girl stated she did not want to play a game with an old man. Kojima took this into consideration; he and his team designed Raiden to be more appealing to women. Designer Yoji Shinkawa said he and the other character designers took much inspiration for Raiden's appearance from the bishōnen archetype. Because Raiden was a new character, the staff designed him carefully, giving him white hair to symbolize his introduction. Shinkawa also said Raiden had an overall feminine appearance. His outfit—the Skull Suit—was difficult to  design until the staff decided on a "bonelike" concept. Shinkawa wanted to make Raiden sexually appealing, emphasizing the tightness of his clothing. The design of Raiden's aqua-mask was inspired by ancient mystical ninjutsu, where the ninja bites a scroll in the mouth during magic transformations. Raiden's final duel with the boss Solidus Snake was revised in the making of the game. Originally, to defeat Solidus, Raiden must cut off both his mechanical snake-like arms, then he must attack Solidus' back and sever the backbone vertebra connection, rendering Solidus no longer mobile. Following this, Raiden would finish Solidus by decapitating him similar to samurai fashion. The scene was rejected and instead, Raiden would slice Solidus' stomach, another idea taken from samurais. However, this concept was also scrapped to simply Raiden slicing Solidus' vertebral column with the boss falling from the area to give the idea he could not accept his defeat.
Konami kept Raiden's starring role in Metal Gear Solid 2 secret until the game's North American release; the company replaced Raiden with Snake in teaser trailers and other preview materials. Although Raiden appeared in several preview trailers in his scuba gear, his presence was not emphasized. The surprise to fans that Raiden was not Snake was admitted by Kojima to have been inspired by the plot twist of Terminator 2: Judgment Day where the titular character played by Arnold Schwarzenegger was not a villain in that movie. Raiden's appearance in the game was announced to the Japanese press on the day of the game's release in North America. Due to the negative response to Raiden's role in the game, Kojima said in the retrospective that the team failed to properly show the character.
Raiden's new design for Metal Gear Solid 4 was a response to the criticism that only his face remained in his cybernetic body. Shinkawa was surprised by the way he illustrated Raiden. The staff noted that Raiden's debut in the game's trailer received notably positive responses; several video-game magazines promoted the game with Raiden's screenshots. Shinkawa stated Raiden was remade as a darker hero to appeal to the Western fanbase. Seeing Gray Fox as one of his favorite characters, Shinkawa made Raiden be an archetype of such character, making Raiden a cyborg-like him. Kojima echoed similar comments, indicating he wanted to expand the character with another game. In designing him, Shinkawa wanted to convey both Raiden's beauty and sorrow in his cybernetic body. He was given the ability to wield swords with his own legs, giving the players the impression he was a ninja. Raiden's first fight against Vamp in the game caused-motion and voice actors difficulty because of carefully planned movements performed by the two fighters. The staff was satisfied with the outcome, considering it one of the best battles in the game. Two actors were selected for the motion capture of Raiden; one did most of his appearances while another did his action sequences. Raiden's fights in Guns of the Patriots were made to assist the weaker Solid Snake and appealed to previous fans of the series who disliked the character. Because Raiden became a more active character in Guns of the Patriots, Kojima expressed a desire in him returning in a future character as playable.
When Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance was known as Metal Gear Solid: Rising, former producer Shigenobu Matsuyama hinted that Raiden's past as a child soldier would be elaborated upon and his weaknesses as a human would be explored. Matsuyama wanted Raiden to have as strong a role in the game as in Metal Gear Solid 2, leading him to become its main character. Director Mineshi Kimura wanted Raiden to be able to move the way he did in the Metal Gear Solid 4 trailers, wanting to show "the stealth of the sword, and the strength of not even losing to the gun, and the fear and power you have with this blade". Matsuyama said they would focus on Raiden's strong will and physical strength so he would be enjoyable to control. Raiden's design was changed during the game's development, leading to different promotional images of him. Following the game's reboot into a spin-off, developers stated that while Raiden "has grown up" in comparison to previous Metal Gear games, he is still conflicted with his life as a child soldier in the First Liberian Civil War, leading him to become a "dark hero". Shinkawa designed Raiden's new body to emphasize his dark heroism, contrasting with his Metal Gear Solid 4 persona. Shinkawa later discussed with Platinum Games' Kenji Saito about including his quasi-human look. Raiden's loss of an eye also represents his transformation across the story while also comparing him with the previous antagonist Solidus Snake. Tamari also explained that the cybernetic functions Raiden has were based on research led by the University of Texas. In response to complaints that Rising appeared to contradict Raiden's ending in Guns of the Patriots, the Kojima Productions staff said the game would explain what happened with Raiden's life. While Steven Armstrong was the game's final antagonist, the character of Jetstream Sam was developed to be Raiden's rival, something Shinkawa and fellow designer Kenichirou Yoshimura worked together to make both of them contrast each other through their visual appearances.
The team in charge of Revengeance depicted Raiden as a more mature character than in his previous appearances; they said his swordplay is not based on any samurai and that Raiden's cybernetic body includes heels because they enable his style of swordplay, where he wields weapons with his feet. When developing the game's, the team thought of Raiden's revenge against his enemies, which resulted in the title "Reveangeance". Writer Etsu Tamari expressed joy in the final product and expected that in the future, the team could make another game focused on Raiden. In a further analysis of how to write Raiden in Revengeance, Tamari stated he needed a new character that would bring him support in the form of the dog-like robot named Bladewolf; Similar to how Snake guides Raiden in Sons of Liberty, the mature Raiden acts like a mentor to Bladewolf across the story resulting in his character arc. Writer Etsu Tamari wanted to portray Raiden as a more mature person who wishes to take Snake's footsteps. Atsushi Inaba wanted the gameplay of Revengeance fit Raiden's style of characterization, resulting in the use of parries rather than defense. Inaba felt honored to work in Revengeance due to how he was able to see a more mature version of the character to the point of wishing for a sequel.

Raiden is first depicted as a white-haired adult who uses a protective suit known as a "Skull Suit" (スカルスーツ, Sukaru Sūtsu) for his missions in Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty. In Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots Raiden's entire body below the upper jaw is replaced with a prototype cybernetic body. His original cybernetic body is replaced with a black one that also covers the left eye for Revengeance.  Although proficient at all types of weaponry, Raiden specializes in wielding swords that resonate at high frequencies for the last fights in Sons of Liberty, and during Guns of the Patriots and Revengeance. In his first appearance, Raiden is a rookie agent who is inexperienced as a result of training only in virtual reality. He later reveals, however, that he was a child soldier known as "Jack the Ripper" (ジャック・ザ・リッパー, Jakku Za Rippā) who killed several enemies in a civil war and is ashamed of his past. This affects Raiden's personality; he begins to believe he is only useful on the battlefield and his relationship with his girlfriend Rosemary would not work. Manipulation by the Patriots causes him to believe he has no free will. Solid Snake encourages Raiden to ignore what people tell him and to become self-reliant when problem-solving. His original personality was that of a "creep or a weirdo" who licked bird excrement, but this was discarded by the staff.
Kojima Productions compared the experiences and ways of thinking of Raiden and Solid Snake. During the game's climax, Raiden stays handcuffed until his final fight against Solidus Snake; Snake escapes from his handcuffs to follow Revolver Ocelot, emphasizing Raiden's lack of freedom. Hideo Kojima compared Raiden and Snake with movie monsters King Kong and Godzilla, respectively; the former was taken from his home and his nature changes upon meeting Rosemary, whereas the latter will continue fighting against mankind's menaces. Defeating Solidus, Snake encourages Raiden to trust himself and believe in his own choices. This is further addressed by the staff's motivation to make a new sequel to Metal Gear without Kojima. Kojima also likened Raiden with John Rambo from the Rambo series because both characters always find themselves taking part in battles despite their desire for a peaceful resolution. Raiden himself believes that he is destined to fight based on his upbringing during Revengeance while also following the concept of katsujinken in which samurai kill in order to protect the weak.
In the Japanese versions of the games, Raiden has been voiced by Kenyu Horiuchi, who first saw him as an attractive young man whose actions in Son of Liberty were challenging for his identity. Horiuchi was impressed by the characterization shown across the game, believing him to fit with other members featured in the game. Kojima liked Horiuchi's work, believing Raiden became popular in Japan in part because of his performance, something which he felt the character lacked in Western regions. could understand the character's pain; despite becoming a cyborg, Raiden still acts like a human. Horiuchi took a liking to Raiden's spin-off game, Revengeance, as he acted as the lead for the first time but was still glad that he got meet new actors who appeared in the game, most notably the actor behind Doktor. The actors also liked the inclusion of Raiden's sidekick, LQ-84i (later renamed Bladewolf), as they believe that ninjas like Raiden obligatory need dogs as allies. Another relationship the actors liked was Raiden's exchanges with Courtney due to few female characters being present in the game but felt they made the characters get along properly. Horiuchi felt confident in being in doing Raiden's voice as the lead, believing his thirty years of experience made him suitable for the role.
Casting director Kris Zimmerman chose Quinton Flynn, with whom she had previously worked, to voice Raiden in the series' English adaptation. Flynn remembers having a long time to develop the character and being instructed by Zimmerman to use an older voice from a character he previously voiced. Flynn said Raiden was one of his favorite video-game voice characters and noted a difference between his roles in Metal Gear Solid 2 and Metal Gear Solid 4; Flynn was pleased with working alongside David Hayter whom he often interacted while recording the game. The English voice recording was overlooked by Scott Dolph, who reported back saying the English voice for Raiden was more neutral than the original Japanese voice. For Metal Gear Solid 4 Flynn used a deeper voice to match the cyborg Raiden in contrast to the original, youthful Raiden of Metal Gear Solid 2. Flynn said the voice he used was "grizzled, yeah—but different enough from the style of Snake". During development of Metal Gear Solid: Rising, Flynn was not informed about the work despite Raiden being in the trailer. As a result, Flynn kept low hopes in regards to the idea of being cast. Addressing Guns of the Patriots's Raiden as more aggressive than the original one, Flynn stated his favorite take on the character was Revengeance's as it there he acted as a "blend" between the two incarnations. He felt honored for taking the role of Raiden again, having received a "Behind The Voice Actors" award for his work. In 2015, Flynn stated he was pleased with Raiden's role in Reveangence and that he would have liked a new sequel Raiden as the lead. Internal problems between Kojima Productions and Konami, however, left Flynn worried there might not be another game in the series.
