Raiden's replacement of fan favorite Solid Snake in Metal Gear Solid 2 proved controversial; GamesRadar considered the replacement a reason to dislike the series. The same site criticized Raiden's role in Metal Gear Solid 2 several times and called his inclusion one of the worst aspects of the game. Snake's voice actor, David Hayter, was also surprised by the inclusion of Raiden in Sons of Liberty believing his character was meant to be the returning protagonist. In 2004, GameAxis Unwired published a fake interview in which Hideo Kojima expressed regret for creating the character. While calling Metal Gear Solid 2 one of the biggest disappointments in video-game history, UGO Networks' Marissa Meli cited Raiden's debut as a key problem with the game. The book Playing with Videogames states that Raiden's inclusion was intended to surprise Metal Gear fans who, instead of playing as Snake, played as his opposite. Writer James Newman commented that fans' reactions were highly negative; they acted as though Kojima had betrayed their expectations. He compared Raiden to the controversial Star Wars character Jar Jar Binks. Newman considered trailers for Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater in which Raiden is mocked to be Konami's comic response to fans' disapproval.
Eurogamer's Tom Bramwell enjoyed Raiden's role, commenting that his interactions with the other characters also helped expand Solid Snake's character. Raiden's introduction was given an award for "Biggest Surprise" by GameSpot in 2001, while Dave Meikleham from GamesRadar listed his appearance as one of the biggest plot twists in a video game because the trailers did not show him. Meikleham also called Raiden a "surprisingly likeable character" and found his dynamic with Solid Snake appealing.
Before joining Kojima Productions, Ryan Payton stated that he was not disappointed by Raiden's introduction and liked the fact the Metal Gear Solid 2 team kept his identity secret. Raiden's English voice actor Quinton Flynn was surprised by fans' response to the character but said it attracted new fans to the series. Flynn thought fans were angry at the idea that Raiden would replace Snake for all subsequent games. Raiden's relationship with Rosemary was listed as the most awkward part of the Metal Gear series by 1UP.com, with writer Scott Sharkey speculating about Hideo Kojima's life because he said the relationship is autobiographical. In retrospective, Raiden was found to be many writers to look like the late singer David Bowie whom Kojima showed tributes across the franchise.
Response to the character in subsequent games was mainly positive. GamePro's Pattrick Shaw analyzed his new design for Metal Gear Solid 4; he said Raiden "was in one hell of a fight". Raiden's redesign has been praised for reducing his androgynous appearance, thus making him more appealing. UGO Networks placed Raiden's design in that game at 18th on its 2011 list of "the most stylin' alternate costumes", but Gavin Mackenzie from PLAY listed it seventh on his list of inappropriate outfits, stating that the costume was "cool" but had unnecessary accessories. It has also been compared with Gray Fox's cybernetic-ninja design in Metal Gear Solid. GameSpot staff stated that Raiden "is definitely the inheritor of the quasi-unkillable Cyborg Ninja inheritance" when he made his first appearance in a Metal Gear Solid 4 trailer. GameSpot applauded his actions in the trailer, calling it "wordlessly awesome" and comparing his stunts with those in the film Casshan: Robot Hunter.
Dave Meikleham of GamesRadar wrote an article titled "Why Metal Gear Solid: Rising [Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance] will make you love Raiden", writing that fans who disliked the character would find him appealing in the game. Raiden's role and development in Revengeance were found to be appealing, with GameSpot's Peter Brown praising his violent attitude that made him an outstanding anti-hero, whereas GameTrailers wrote that Raiden contrasted with his Metal Gear Solid 2 persona that was criticized in 2001. The Escapist said Raiden was now worthy of his own game based on his characterization. Polygon said that while Raiden's actions provide a departure from the stealth games, his actions were referred as "outlandish and ridiculous". The detail given to Raiden's past was also praised. IGN wrote that fans of Metal Gear Solid 4 would enjoy the game more because Raiden can replicate his moves from that game's cutscenes in gameplay. Eurogamer said a major change in Raiden's characterization is Revengeance, referring to him as a "the ultimate cyborg and also the ultimate killer" based on his darker persona that is explored in combat. The idea of Raiden primarily using his sword to counterattack firepower was found appealing by Complex due to how Revengeance explores the soldier as a melee fighter. Flynn's performance earned mixed response due to the tones he gives Raiden when interacting with allies and enemies.
PLAY editor Nick Jones listed the scene in which Raiden is nude as his fourth-favorite moment of the franchise, calling it the "one of the funniest moments in gaming history". Lisa Foiles of The Escapist included him on her 2014 list of top five katana wielders, writing "this is not a popularity contest and Raiden qualifies" even in MGS2 where "he was whiny, an emo, and kind of a bitch". Raiden proved to be more popular in Japan; according to Yoji Shinkawa this was because he matched the stereotype of the manga hero.
Game Informer placed him on "The Snubbed List" of the best characters of the 2000s in response to his new design because it made fans like the idea of a new Metal Gear game solely focused on Raiden.  In a 2010 Famitsu readers' poll, Raiden was voted the 42nd most-popular video game character. GamePro called Raiden's encounter with Vamp in this game one of the "most memorable cinematics" of the series because of his change of fighting style from his debut as he "redeems his girlish image", while IGN listed it as the 80th best moment in video-game history for similar reasons. In 2013, Complex ranked Raiden as the 12th-greatest soldier in video games, "even as he's not as cool as Solid Snake", while GamesRadar called Revengeance "perhaps the greatest cyborg ninja game of all time". PLAY ranked Raiden as the second-top ninja in games. While surpassed by Solid Snake, GamesRadar listed Raiden as the second-best video game hero of all time. In 2012, manga artist Hiro Mashima drew an illustration of Raiden in anticipation of the series' following games. He mentioned having had difficulties illustrating the character. Following Metal Gear Solid 4's release, Raiden also appeared in more lists. IGN's Jesse Schedeen listed Raiden as one of the "gaming icons" and most valuable players of 2009, in response to his role in an upcoming Metal Gear title. Den of Geek listed Raiden as one of the most sexually appealing video game characters, calling him disappointing to some but to others "a pin-up forever".
In promoting Revengeance, Raiden's design by Shinkawa was used in presence in London, Leeds and Liverpool during 2013. Voice actor Reuben Langdon described Raiden as a character he always wanted to play as, most notably on Super Smash Bros.
Raiden's role in Metal Gear Solid 2 has been analyzed by several writers, who said he is intended to represent the player. Early in the game, when Raiden's virtual reality training is mentioned, the game shows scenes from the previous game Metal Gear Solid in which the player takes control of Solid Snake. Raiden's interactions with veteran Solid Snake identify the former as "a Metal Gear fan". As the game progresses it is stated that Raiden "has become Snake", having developed skills similar to those he gained from taking part in the Big Shell's fights that resemble Metal Gear Solid's Shadow Moses Island. The recurring plot twist involving Raiden's life and the people with whom he often interacts have been praised as being early post-truth content in a video game. Raiden's interaction with the Patriots was also analyzing the way the digital era became relevant over a decade after Sons of Liberty was released. Raiden's development in Sons of Liberty were becomes a stronger soldier for imitating Snake's role in Metal Gear Solid was retold in The Phantom Pain when the player learns their character, Venom Snake, is not the famous Big Boss but instead a doctor who was hypnotized into being a double of the mercenary across the video game.
Later in the game, a character tells Raiden to "turn off the console", which confuses both Raiden and the player; this was first interpreted as a fourth wall-breaking joke but the game's climax goes deeper into Raiden's connection with the player. When his superiors force Raiden to kill the game's antagonist, Solidus Snake, the designers tell the player to finish the game. Both the player and Raiden take different paths at the game's end; the player is told not to waste time playing games while Raiden's character is expanded with his decision to move on with his life, rejecting his previous identity by discarding the dog tags the player wore in the beginning.
Upon the revelation of Raiden's new design as a cyborg ninja, writers said he distanced himself from his previous appearance that imitated Solid Snake. Raiden's increasingly masculine redesigns following his debut were noted be a leaning to Western heroes in gaming despite Raiden retaining his original characterization by Todd Harper in the book Queerness in Play. IGN also said Raiden becomes a different type of game hero with a new, direct fighting style. being instead compared with the lead characters from Devil May Cry and God of War  favorably due to how they fight. Raiden finding conviction with his inner past persona during Revengeance was noted to go with the ideas of enjoying the hack and slash mechanics provided the developers as Raiden has kill enemies while also being able to face properly all of enemies who share values with him during cutscenes.
